# California Aquatic Bioassessment Workgroup, Oct. 23-24 2018

## Session: Leveraging data visualization in bioassessment applications

Bioassessment indices have been sufficiently developed in California to allow comprehensive condition assessments of stream health across regions.  Indices using macroinvertebrates and algae provide consistent indications of biological condition, independent of location.  Physical habitat indices have also recently been developed that provide complementary information supporting bioassessment data.  Combined, these indices represent significant achievements in overcoming technical challenges for developing accurate and interpretable bioassessment methods.  However, the application of bioassessment data to inform decisions is limited, typically only taking advantage of a fraction of the wealth of methods that are available.  Bioassessment tools will not realize their full potential unless 1) methods are developed that synthesize condition assessments from multiple methods and 2) data are presented in a context that is relevant to the needs of decision makers.  

Effective data visualization can overcome these challenges by distilling complex information in the context of user needs.  Static or dynamic approaches to viewing data can provide a vehicle for translating an application to a specific context.  This session will explore the range of possibilities for how data visualization can be leveraged to facilitate the use of bioassessment data in decision-making.  Newly-developing applications in California will be presented to demonstrate proofs of concept from diverse fields of resource management.  Overall, this session will advocate for more widespread use of data visualization methods in bioassessment and empower others to bridge the gap between method and application.
	
